Rich Dad and Poor Dad
=====================

Introduction
------------

I read a book - "Rich Dad, Poor Dad" by Robert T. Kiyosaki. This is a great
book to start for anyone (or read anytime in your life, even if you are an
finance expert!) to get enlightened financially.

The author's own father, referred as Poor Dad, is a Ph.D and led a very
commonplace life financially and represents most of us, who just believe,
studying hard, getting good academic grades, getting a good job is the way to
lead a successful life. The author's friend's father, referred as Rich Dad, is
a school dropout, but led a brilliant life financially.  The author recounts a
lot of advise given by his Rich dad and contrasts it against that of his poor
dad, and also sheds a lot of light on many things we need to know. I strongly
recommend reading this book.

In this article, I just want to share, (which sometimes repeat what is 
already in the book), a lot of rich-dad/poor-dad behavior patterns that
I have come across, which i can map to what is said in the book. 

Disclaimer
----------

I am just liberally borrowing the term from the book, and just sharing my
interpretation, views and understanding. This may not exactly match what is
expounded by the book.  And importantly, I am no expert :) And it is now a
personal first-hand revelation to me, that one can appear to preach quite well,
without having to practise it first :) Ignore the messenger and just take the
message.

Patterns
--------

Any physicst will tell us that the rainbow in an infinte gradation of colors
and we just pick seven colors in this - VIBGYOR for our convenience, to refer
to the spectrum. Similarly the rich dad and poor dad terms are behavior
patterns that represent two extremes. We all have some behaviors of rich dad
and some behaviors of poor dad in us. The article is to highlight these
behaviors in us.  Hopefully we move towards being a rich dad in our lives
and live an enriching and abundant life.

They begin with the same resources
-----------------------------------

Our hypothetical rich dad and poor dad, both begin with exactly the same
resources as they start on thier career. They get placed on the same job, they
earn the same fresherman's salary and have little other income. However, the
rich dad's behavior makes him end up live a rich life, while the poor dad seems
to always eternally be stuck up being poor. Importantly rich dad is rich because
of choices he made, while poor dad is poor because of choices he made (or
choices he did not make). This is the heart of the message.

The Differences
---------------

.Rich Dad Vs Poor Dad
[cols="2h,5,5",options="header"]
|====================
| Behaviour  | Rich Dad   |  Poor Dad

| Responsiblity | 
Rich Dad believes generating wealth is in his hands. He is willing to learn
ways to earn his wealth and to control his expenses.
|
Poor Dad blames his external circumstances for keeping him poor. He always
expects his boss/company to pay him more, his country and law-makers to be more
considerate of him. And he firmly belives all his expenses are inevitable for a
person in his shoes.

| Knows Compounding | 
Rich dad is aware of what is compound interest and how it plays an important 
role in his financial life. He knows his savings, loans and inflation grow
at a compounded rate.
| 
Poor Dad learnt about compound interest in 8th grade at school and long since
forgotten about it. He hears terms like inflation-rate, loan-interest-rate
or CAGR, but is unable to correlate to P(1+r)^n^ that he learnt in school.

| Invests early |
Rich dad realizes that his money works best, when given more time and thus
invests early. He knows that n sits in the power of the compound interest
formula and is equally important if not more, than the rate of interest.
|
Poor dad doesn't understand significance of time, and always chases only 
the interest-rate, hoping this will multiply his money. He keeps liquidating
his investments in short periods.

| Willing to learn about Finance |
Rich dad knows that he must be aware of personal finance and spends time to
understand each concept and takes action after learning these.
|
Poor dad believes personal finance is like walking and just happens for 
everybody.

| Wants to understand any product |
Rich dad wont enter a financial product, unless he fully understands how
it works. He would be circumspect, when a product claims to offer a better
returns than a simple bank's deposit. He would like to know how the money
multiplies in an instrument, by using his common sense. 
| 
Poor dad just feels if everyone around him is going by a product, then
the product is the nice thing to put his money in.

| Personal Ownership |
Rich dad knows that ultimately he is responsible for his decisions. He 
listens to media, friends on how each product has performed in the past
and gets recommendations. But he does his due diligence and knows he 
is the only person responsible for his choice of investments.
| 
Poor dad is aghast at how his truest friends could have made him invest
in the lousy stocks/mutual-funds. He is convinced that the world no
longer has true, honest people.

| Familiar with tools to calculate |
Rich dad is fairly familiar with a tool of his choice - an internet site,
a spreadsheet program, a calcuator which he can make use of to arrive 
at the returns rate of any deal. He regularly uses this to check for himself
on the numbers published/heard from various sources. His regularity in 
checking has given him an off-hand comfort that at 8%, money doubles in 9 years
and at 9% money doubles in 8 years. He knows however, intuition is always
dangerous and he swallows only after verifying in his tool.
| 
Poor dad has no clue on how to check the returns of a deal. He just belives
the number published in papers. He hopes the auditors whoever publish these
numbers know what they are doing. He thinks his uncle made a stunning profit
by selling his house for 2C, which he purchased for 1L. He is oblivious
of the fact that this was purchased 60 years back, and that this significantly
matters in deciding the worth of the deal.

| Understands what is a asset |
Rich dad knows what is a asset - An asset is something which puts/can put money
in his pocket, at a rate greater than his purchase value and inflation.
| 
Poor dad confuses between asset and liability. He believes anything he 
has paid money to acquire is his asset. He is unaware, when he buys any
product, of the recurring expenses that would be involved to keep it and
its depreciation.

| Expands his assets |
Rich dad believes that, while he gets his salary, it would be always good
to build assets, which will supplement his regular income.
|
Poor dad doesn't realize that one needs to build assets. He thinks his 
salary is enough for his working life and the statutory funds like
employee provident fund, gratuity is enough for his retired life.

| Financial Goals |
Rich dad knows that there are many events in life, that need money. And a 
good deal of them are completely well predictable events both on their
time of occurence and amount required for the event. He calcuates their
estimated values to a reasonable accuracy using scientific methods and plans to
meet those expenses from a early age, by investing towards them.
|
Poor dad just lives on his salary every month, and is stumped by events in
life, that seem to suck all his money abruptly without notice. He for instance,
squarely blames the government and greedy college administrators for making
education of his kid so astronomically high and impossible for
poor middle-class people like him.

| Has his priorities right |
Rich dad knows which things are dear to him and in which priority. For 
example, he places emergency fund, retirement corpus, kids education, corpus
to start his cherished dream-project, as his foremost financial priorities.
Things like a house, car come next. When he comes across a new cool gadget, he
realizes that instinctive buying will jeopardize his important goals and
stays away. Interestingly, this knowledge empowers him and he is no longer 
afflicted by the craving to own cool things.
| 
Poor dad has no clue on his priorities. He is unaware that one has to think
about and explicity set priorities. He gets carried away by the new stunning
new phone that gets released and the pouring reviews on how this phone is
worth its money. He concludes that buying a gadget is perfectly okay as
its just one-third of his take-home salary! Interestingly, poor dad always
has this unsatiated craving after every gadget wears off in its novelty.

| Life Insurance |
Rich dad doesn't confuse insurance and investment. He picks a term insurance
and arrives at the insurance amount required to protect his dear ones in a 
mathematical manner.
| 
Poor dad just belives insuring without getting his premiums back is completely
stupid. He picks an endowment and a unit-linked plan from a very respected and
popular insurance company, which he is sure, wont cheat on poor people's money.
He ofcourse can't afford to insure to the real requirement and just purchases
a plan that can fit his income and current expenses and thinks he has did
his best on this front.

| Other insurances |
Rich dad knows he has to insure his health and unforseen disabilities. No one
can control fate. He also knows that insurance companies shy away from issuing
insurances as one gets older and acquires general age-related issues. So, he
starts on a good inflation adjusted health insurance plan right from his early
age. He has a group insurance from his employer too which he always uses first
but also continues his personal insurance.
|
Poor dad believes he is a disciplined driver and disabilities insurance is not
for people like him. He is already covered for health by his employer and 
feels an extra insurance is just for paranoics.

| Hobbies |
Rich dad's habit of carefully planning his finances, gently rubs on other
aspects of his life too. He spends a lot of personal moments contemplating on
what makes him happy from within. He pursues his hobbies and knows anything in
life needs time and money. He plans for augmenting his hobby with right
gadgets. He gradually moves on from a amatuer to a serious hobbyist. People
around him are awed. But that is just secondary. His biggest pleasure is his
heart soaring at doing what it loves to do.
| 
Poor dad, just looks around at what is currently hip. He dabbles at a camera,
at a skating shoe, with a tennis racket. He feels, getting the fun of all this
is just a step away. But is confounded at how idiotic things are after he 
tries them and wonder how anyone could consider this fun. He is oblivious of 
the piling stuff in his home and the dent they are making in his purse. He 
doesn't get rid of them too. He is going to try them someday, when he gets
"time".

| Learns taxes and law |
Rich dad belives that one has to actively know about taxes and relevant law and
a sound first hand knowledge of this is central to his wealth building. This
is more important than the trignometry or calculus he leart at school and 
college. Although not as complex, he knows he has to invest time and effort 
in knowing this, as they are quite vast and unfortunately there is no simple
text book that explains them accurately from scratch in plain English.
|
Poor dad prides himself on being one of the first in his class to understand
how to read clark's logarithm tables and do calcuations in his science
experiment class. He has helped his fellow mates on the eve of exams in
teaching boyle's law, avagadro's number. But learning law and taxes - come-on,
they are for lawyers and charted accountants. He shrugs it off.

| Knows about various Finance Instruments |
Rich dad is aware of the choices one has on investing, ranging from fixed
deposits, recurring deposits, physical gold, electronic gold, bonds,
debentures, Fixed Maturity plans, debt-based-mutual funds, equity-mutual funds,
equity, derivatives, real-estate, forex and many more. He is able to
distinguish between debt and equity. He knows about the tax implications of
each product. He knows the risk invovled with each product. While he wouldn't
invest immediately, he is open to listen to new products on how they work. 
| 
Poor dad thinks fixed deposits, buying a house and plot are all there is
to investing. He is carried away by the beautifully articulated sales person
on a new multi-level marketing scheme and is convinced this is the mantra
of the rich, and he missed being rich till date because, he was not in this.

| Loans |
Rich dad believes in the common sense of economics - "In any economy, the 
lending interest rate will be higher than the savings rate". Thus he always
stays away from loans, unless he is completely convinced that the loan is
made cheap by factors outside of the loan like tax benefits. He knows 
getting into a loan is just detrimental to his financial well-being.
| 
Poor dad just loves sellers who offer EMI schedules for their products. He
thanks them for making things "affordable" for people like him. He is happy
that the seller has the option of extending the time period and reduce the per
month EMI. He believes, as long as the EMI amount is within his current
take-home minus current expenses, he is all set for the loan. 

| Retirement |
Rich dad understands retirement - Its the time point in his life, where he 
has built enough assets that would take care of him and his dependants
by themselves for the rest of life for his chosen life-style. He plans
for it and retires quite early in life. He then completely pursues his
heart's call beyond this point. He has already identified this call in 
his earning-period and has been already building/spending time on it.
Just that there is no longer the compulsion to stay at his regular work
any longer.
| 
Poor dad thinks retirement is simply the age stipulated by law-makers till
which one person works as a regular employee in an organization. He hopes
working till this age, will help him live a king-sized life afterwards
and that he can pursue all the joys he is missing in his work-life post
retirement. But he is petrified at reality once he approaches this age.
He is mortified at how a honest, hard-worker like him is being treated
so unjustly by life and the society.

|=============

